JUDY WOODRUFF: The words from
Mexico's president,
Enrique Pena Nieto, this
afternoon said it
all: "Mission accomplished. We
have him."
The him is perhaps the world's
most-notorious
drug lord, Joaquin Guzman, known
as El Chapo,
the ringleader of the Sinaloa
cartel. He was
arrested after a fierce gun
battle today,
nearly six months after his
elaborate escape
from a high-security prison.
We go to Hari Sreenivasan for
more.
HARI SREENIVASAN: I'm joined now
by Alfredo
Corchado, director of the
Borderlands program
at the Cronkite School of
Journalism at Arizona
State University. He has also
reported for
many years from Mexico for The
Dallas Morning
News, and is author of "Midnight
in Mexico,"
a book about his experience
covering the brutal
drug war.
So, let's start with the basics.
What happened?
Where was he? How did he get
captured?
ALFREDO CORCHADO, Arizona State
University:
Well, he was captured this
morning right before
dawn, intense firefight between
the marines
and drug traffickers, people
close to or guarding
Chapo Guzman.
What we know is that, since last
July, the
marines, with the help of U.S.
intelligence,
had been tracking him in several
Mexican states,
including Sinaloa, where he was
captured this
morning, the state of Durango,
and even Tabasco.
This -- there were two
confrontations, from
what we know, the first one at a
private home
and then he was later captured
at a motel.
Five of his trusted bodyguards
were killed,
and at least one marine was
wounded.
HARI SREENIVASAN: This is the
second time
the president of Mexico has gone
on national
television and said they have
got this guy.
I mean, this is an important
win.
ALFREDO CORCHADO: This is the
second time
for President Pena Nieto, and
the third time
that a Mexican president has
said that.
He said, you know, "Mission
accomplished,"
but I think a lot of people will
feel that
the mission has not been
accomplished until
Chapo actually faces justice.
And the best
chance of doing that will be on
the U.S. side.
So, there's a lot of tangling
already going
on, a lot of debate as to
whether he will
be extradited this time.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And let's talk
a little
bit about that. The United
States has asked
for extradition. Do you think
that that is
a greater possibility now?
ALFREDO CORCHADO: I think the
timing is -- it's
much better than last time.
I think, the first time he was
captured, there
was a lot of angst, a lot of
reticence within
the Mexican government. There
was the suspicion
that you don't want to let the
Americans get
too close, come in too close.
But after this huge
embarrassment that went
worldwide, I think there is a
sense that this
may be good for Mexican
government. This obviously
will be good for the U.S.
government.
But keep in mind that Chapo
Guzman has a vast
army of lawyers. And I'm sure
that the -- even
before he's captured, there was
already a
fight to -- for temporary
injunctions that
prohibit or that would stop an
extradition.
It may happen, but I think it's
a long, long
ways before this happens.
HARI SREENIVASAN: What
involvement was there,
if any, by the U.S. in assisting
with the
capture?
ALFREDO CORCHADO: Well, my
sources tell me
that the U.S. has been helping
the Mexican
marines since the capture with
intelligence,
but, unlike the first time,
there were no
U.S. agents on the ground
assisting the Mexican
marines and the federal police.
So, this is a -- was primarily a
Mexican operation.
HARI SREENIVASAN: You know,
Chapo Guzman already
had almost folklore status, but
that prison
break and how elaborate it was
just six months
ago really sealed it.
ALFREDO CORCHADO: Right.
And, today, the premiere of the
movie "Chapo"
is in Mexico City. They're
expecting at least
four other movies this year.
There's talk
about a series, or there have
been books.
It will be interesting to see
how people in
regions in Mexico, especially
Sinaloa, how
they will react.
Will they come out and protest
again because
of this arrest? Will they let it
go? I'm sure
there will be -- I'm sure there
are already
songs being written at this
moment, as we
speak, about Chapo's latest
capture.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Is there some
sense that
this will be a more significant
blow to the
drug cartels? In some ways, his
capture or
his escape seems to be almost
representative
of the Mexican government's
ability to tackle
the drug war.
ALFREDO CORCHADO: And the
ability to try to
create a country with rule of
law.
I think what is interesting
about today's
capture is that Chapo's main
lieutenant known
as El Cholo Ivan was also
captured. So, that's
a huge blow to the Sinaloa
cartel.
But, as we have seen, the
Sinaloa cartel,
for a long time, has been really
under the
control of Zambada, Mayo
Zambada. So, that
-- there might be some
territorial fights
in places like Ciudad Juarez,
and Chihuahua,
other places, but it's business
as usual,
as long as you have U.S. demand,
I think the
drugs will continue to come up
north.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All right,
Alfredo Corchado,
director of the Borderlands
program at the
Cronkite School of Journalism at
Arizona State,
thanks so much for joining us.
ALFREDO CORCHADO: Thank you.